README.md, before:

# Nix Darwin System Configuration

A modular, reproducible system configuration for macOS using Nix, nix-darwin, and home-manager.

## What is Nix?

Nix is a powerful package manager and system configuration tool that takes a unique approach to package management and system configuration. It ensures that installing or upgrading one package cannot break other packages, enables multiple versions of a package to coexist, and makes it easy to roll back to previous versions.

### Key Features

- **Declarative Configuration**
  - Your entire system defined as code
  - Reproducible environments
  - Safe, atomic updates

### Why Use Nix?

- **For Developers**
  - Consistent development environments
  - Project-specific package versions
  - Easy sharing of development setups

- **For System Configuration**
  - Version control your entire system
  - Test changes safely
  - Roll back when needed

### Learn More

- 📘 [Nix Package Manager Guide](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/)
- 🎓 [Nix Pills Tutorial](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/)
- 💡 [Home Manager Manual](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/)
- 🔧 [Nix Darwin Documentation](https://github.com/LnL7/nix-darwin)

## Core Components

Each component serves a specific purpose in creating a reproducible system:

- **nix-darwin**: System-level macOS configuration
  - Manages macOS settings and preferences
  - Handles system-level packages
  - Controls system defaults and security

- **Home Manager**: User environment management
  - Manages user-specific configurations
  - Handles dotfiles and program settings
  - Ensures consistent user environment

- **Homebrew**: macOS package management
  - Manages GUI applications
  - Handles macOS-specific packages
  - Provides quick updates for certain tools

## Design Decisions

### Why Nix?

1. **Reproducibility**
    - Exact same setup across machines
    - Version-controlled configuration
    - Declarative system definition

2. **Modularity**
    - Separate system and user config
    - Easy to enable/disable features
    - Reusable configuration modules

3. **Reliability**
    - Atomic updates
    - Rollback capability
    - Consistent state management

4. **Performance Optimized**
    - Lazy loading for heavy functions
    - Streamlined configuration files
    - Fast shell startup times

### File Structure

The repository is organized into logical, optimized components:

- `darwin/` - System configuration
  - Separates macOS-specific settings
  - Manages system-wide packages
  - Controls security policies

- `home-manager/` - User environment (Optimized)
  - Modular program configurations with helper functions
  - Lazy-loaded AWS SSO functions for fast startup
  - Personal preferences and tools
  - Shell and terminal setup

- `nix/` - Core Nix setup
  - Basic Nix configuration
  - Shell integration
  - Dynamic configurations

## Prerequisites

- macOS (Apple Silicon - M*)
- Administrative access
- Basic terminal knowledge

## Quick Start

The simplest way to get started is with our one-command setup:

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mlgruby/dotfile-nix/main/setup.sh | bash
```

Or if you prefer to download and inspect first:

```bash
curl -o setup.sh https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mlgruby/dotfile-nix/main/setup.sh
chmod +x setup.sh
./setup.sh
```

This will automatically:

- Download the full installation script
- Perform system checks
- Ask for your preferred directory name (defaults to `dotfile`)
- Guide you through the complete setup process

## Manual Installation

If you prefer to do the setup manually:

1. **Install Command Line Tools**

```bash
xcode-select --install
```

2. **Clone Configuration**

```bash
mkdir -p ~/Documents
cd ~/Documents
git clone https://github.com/mlgruby/dotfile-nix.git dotfile
cd dotfile
```

3. **Configure User Settings**

```bash
cp user-config.template.nix user-config.nix
```

     Edit `user-config.nix` with your information:

```nix
{
  username = "your-macos-username";  # Must match your macOS login
  fullName = "Your Full Name";
  email = "your.email@example.com";
  githubUsername = "your-github-username";
  hostname = "your-hostname";  # e.g., macbook-pro
}
```

4. **Run Installation**

This script automates the initial setup: installs Xcode tools (if needed), Homebrew, Nix, clones this repository if needed, sets up initial symlinks (including for a temporary shell environment from `nix/`), and performs the first system build using `nix-darwin`.

```bash
./pre-nix-installation.sh
```

After the script completes and the first build is successful, **open a new terminal window** for the fully configured environment managed by Home Manager to take effect.

## SSH Setup & Validation

The installation script includes intelligent SSH key management:

- **Detects existing SSH keys** and lets you choose which to use
- **Creates GitHub-specific key** at `~/.ssh/github` (via symlink or new key)
- **Automatically uploads** your public key to GitHub
- **Configures SSH properly** for seamless GitHub authentication

**Validate your SSH setup anytime:**

```bash
./validate-ssh.sh
```

This will check:
- SSH key existence and type
- SSH agent configuration
- GitHub connection status
- Home-manager SSH configuration
- Provide troubleshooting guidance

## GPG Setup for GitHub (Optional but Recommended)

For enhanced security and verified commits on GitHub, you can automatically set up GPG signing:

```bash
./setup-gpg-github.sh
```

This script will:

- ✅ Check if a GPG key already exists for your email
- ✅ Generate a new GPG key if needed (using secure defaults)
- ✅ Authenticate with GitHub (if not already done)
- ✅ Upload your public key to GitHub automatically
- ✅ Update your `user-config.nix` with the key ID
- ✅ Rebuild your configuration
- ✅ Test GPG signing functionality

**Prerequisites:**

- `user-config.nix` must be configured with your email
- GitHub CLI authentication (script will prompt if needed)

**After setup:**

- All your commits will be automatically signed
- GitHub will show "Verified" badges on your commits
- Your GPG key ID will be saved in `user-config.nix`

**Manual GitHub Authentication (if needed):**

```bash
gh auth login
```

**Example Output:**

```
=== Automated GPG Setup for GitHub ===

[INFO] Checking prerequisites...
[SUCCESS] Prerequisites check passed
[INFO] Extracting user information from user-config.nix...
[SUCCESS] User info extracted: John Doe <john@example.com>
[INFO] Checking for existing GPG keys...
[WARNING] No existing GPG key found for john@example.com
[INFO] Generating new GPG key for john@example.com...
[SUCCESS] GPG key generated successfully: ABC123DEF456789
[INFO] Checking GitHub authentication...
[SUCCESS] GitHub authentication confirmed
[INFO] Checking if GPG key already exists on GitHub...
[WARNING] GPG key not found on GitHub
[INFO] Uploading GPG key to GitHub...
[SUCCESS] GPG key uploaded to GitHub successfully
[INFO] Updating user-config.nix with GPG key ID...
[SUCCESS] Updated user-config.nix with GPG key ID: ABC123DEF456789
[INFO] Rebuilding Darwin configuration...
[SUCCESS] Darwin configuration rebuilt successfully
[INFO] Testing GPG signing...
[SUCCESS] GPG signing test passed
[SUCCESS] Git signing is enabled

[SUCCESS] GPG setup completed successfully!

Next steps:
1. Make a test commit: git commit -m 'Test GPG signing'
2. Push to GitHub: git push origin main
3. Check GitHub for the 'Verified' badge
4. Your GPG key ID is: ABC123DEF456789
```

## Applying Changes

After the initial setup, to apply any changes you make to the configuration files in this repository, run the following command from the `~/Documents/dotfile` directory:

```bash
sudo darwin-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
# Or use the 'rebuild' alias (which includes sudo automatically)
rebuild
```

**Note:** The `sudo` is required due to recent nix-darwin updates that require system activation to run as root for security reasons.

## Directory Structure

```bash
.
├── darwin/                      # macOS system configuration
│   ├── configuration.nix        # Core system settings
│   ├── homebrew.nix             # Homebrew package management
│   ├── nix-settings.nix         # Nix daemon configuration
│   ├── macos-defaults.nix       # macOS system defaults
│   └── misc-system.nix          # Miscellaneous system settings
├── flake.lock                   # Lock file for dependencies
├── flake.nix                    # System definition
├── home-manager/                # User environment
│   ├── aliases.nix              # Shell aliases (optimized with helper functions)
│   ├── default.nix              # Main user configuration
│   ├── neovim.nix               # Neovim configuration
│   └── modules/                 # Configuration modules
│       ├── alacritty/           # Terminal emulator
│       │   ├── config.toml      # Alacritty configuration
│       │   └── default.nix      # Module definition
│       ├── aws-sso.nix          # AWS SSO with lazy loading
│       ├── aws.nix              # AWS CLI configuration
│       ├── git.nix              # Git configuration
│       ├── github.nix           # GitHub CLI setup
│       ├── karabiner/           # Keyboard customization
│       │   └── default.nix      # Module definition
│       ├── lazygit.nix          # Git TUI configuration
│       ├── rectangle.nix        # Window management
│       ├── starship.nix         # Shell prompt (optimized)
│       ├── tmux.nix             # Terminal multiplexer
│       └── zsh.nix              # Shell configuration
├── nix/                         # Nix configuration
│   ├── dynamic-config.zsh       # Dynamic shell config
│   ├── nix.conf                 # Nix settings
│   └── zshrc                    # ZSH configuration
├── docs/                        # Documentation
├── pre-nix-installation.sh      # Installation script
├── uninstall.sh                 # Uninstallation script
├── user-config.nix              # User settings (Created from template)
└── user-config.template.nix     # Template for user settings
```

**Note on `nix/` Directory:** The files `nix/zshrc` and `nix/dynamic-config.zsh` are symlinked directly into `~/` by the `pre-nix-installation.sh` script. They provide a minimal, temporary shell environment immediately after the script finishes, before you open a new terminal. The full, robust shell environment is declaratively configured by Home Manager (`home-manager/modules/zsh.nix`) and takes effect in new terminal sessions after the first build.

## Quick Reference

**⚡ Performance Optimized**: Fast shell startup with lazy-loaded functions and streamlined configurations.

### System Commands

```bash
rebuild   # Alias for sudo darwin-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
update    # Update flake inputs and rebuild
cleanup   # Clean old Nix generations
```

### Common Tools

```bash
# Git
gs        # Status
gp        # Push
gl        # Pull
lg        # LazyGit TUI

# GitHub
ghprc     # Checkout PR
ghprl     # List PRs

# Cloud (lazy-loaded for fast startup)
awsp      # Switch AWS profile
awsf      # Ultimate AWS workflow
```

## Documentation

Comprehensive documentation is organized into the following sections:

### Core Guides

- [Installation Guide](docs/core/installation.md) - Complete setup instructions
- [Configuration Guide](docs/core/configuration.md) - System configuration
- [Troubleshooting Guide](docs/core/troubleshooting.md) - Common issues and solutions

### Tool Configuration

- [Git & GitHub](docs/git.md)
- [Cloud Tools](docs/cloud.md)
- [Terminal Tools](docs/terminal.md)

### Customization

- [Package Management](docs/customization/packages.md) - Adding and managing packages
- [Module System](docs/customization/modules.md) - Working with modules
- [Theme Configuration](docs/customization/themes.md) - Visual customization

Each guide contains detailed examples and best practices for its respective area.

## Uninstallation

```bash
./uninstall.sh
```

## Acknowledgments

This configuration was developed with the assistance of [Cursor](https://cursor.sh), an AI-powered code editor that helped:

- Generate and structure configuration files
- Debug Nix expressions
- Create comprehensive documentation
- Maintain consistent code style

## Important Notes

-*   **Neovim:** The Neovim configuration (`home-manager/neovim.nix`) uses an activation script to bootstrap a [LazyVim](https://www.lazyvim.org/) starter configuration into `~/.config/nvim` if that directory doesn't exist. Subsequent Neovim configuration changes should be made manually within `~/.config/nvim`. For a fully declarative setup, `programs.neovim` would need significant refactoring.

Commit message:

Update README.md and setup.sh for enhanced installation options
- Introduced two setup options in README.md: one-command automatic setup and interactive download and run.
- Updated setup.sh to handle piped execution, providing guidance for interactive use and automatic proceeding after a delay.
- Improved user experience with clearer instructions and prompts during installation.

README.md, after:

# Nix Darwin System Configuration

A modular, reproducible system configuration for macOS using Nix, nix-darwin, and home-manager.

## What is Nix?

Nix is a powerful package manager and system configuration tool that takes a unique approach to package management and system configuration. It ensures that installing or upgrading one package cannot break other packages, enables multiple versions of a package to coexist, and makes it easy to roll back to previous versions.

### Key Features

- **Declarative Configuration**
  - Your entire system defined as code
  - Reproducible environments
  - Safe, atomic updates

### Why Use Nix?

- **For Developers**
  - Consistent development environments
  - Project-specific package versions
  - Easy sharing of development setups

- **For System Configuration**
  - Version control your entire system
  - Test changes safely
  - Roll back when needed

### Learn More

- 📘 [Nix Package Manager Guide](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/)
- 🎓 [Nix Pills Tutorial](https://nixos.org/guides/nix-pills/)
- 💡 [Home Manager Manual](https://nix-community.github.io/home-manager/)
- 🔧 [Nix Darwin Documentation](https://github.com/LnL7/nix-darwin)

## Core Components

Each component serves a specific purpose in creating a reproducible system:

- **nix-darwin**: System-level macOS configuration
  - Manages macOS settings and preferences
  - Handles system-level packages
  - Controls system defaults and security

- **Home Manager**: User environment management
  - Manages user-specific configurations
  - Handles dotfiles and program settings
  - Ensures consistent user environment

- **Homebrew**: macOS package management
  - Manages GUI applications
  - Handles macOS-specific packages
  - Provides quick updates for certain tools

## Design Decisions

### Why Nix?

1. **Reproducibility**
    - Exact same setup across machines
    - Version-controlled configuration
    - Declarative system definition

2. **Modularity**
    - Separate system and user config
    - Easy to enable/disable features
    - Reusable configuration modules

3. **Reliability**
    - Atomic updates
    - Rollback capability
    - Consistent state management

4. **Performance Optimized**
    - Lazy loading for heavy functions
    - Streamlined configuration files
    - Fast shell startup times

### File Structure

The repository is organized into logical, optimized components:

- `darwin/` - System configuration
  - Separates macOS-specific settings
  - Manages system-wide packages
  - Controls security policies

- `home-manager/` - User environment (Optimized)
  - Modular program configurations with helper functions
  - Lazy-loaded AWS SSO functions for fast startup
  - Personal preferences and tools
  - Shell and terminal setup

- `nix/` - Core Nix setup
  - Basic Nix configuration
  - Shell integration
  - Dynamic configurations

## Prerequisites

- macOS (Apple Silicon - M*)
- Administrative access
- Basic terminal knowledge

## Quick Start

### Option 1: One-Command Setup (Automatic)

For a quick setup that proceeds automatically after 5 seconds:

```bash
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mlgruby/dotfile-nix/main/setup.sh | bash
```

### Option 2: Download and Run (Interactive)

For full interactive control with confirmation prompts:

```bash
curl -o setup.sh https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mlgruby/dotfile-nix/main/setup.sh
chmod +x setup.sh
./setup.sh
```

This will automatically:

- Download the full installation script
- Perform system checks
- Ask for your preferred directory name (defaults to `dotfile`)
- Guide you through the complete setup process

## Manual Installation

If you prefer to do the setup manually:

1. **Install Command Line Tools**

```bash
xcode-select --install
```

2. **Clone Configuration**

```bash
mkdir -p ~/Documents
cd ~/Documents
git clone https://github.com/mlgruby/dotfile-nix.git dotfile
cd dotfile
```

3. **Configure User Settings**

```bash
cp user-config.template.nix user-config.nix
```

     Edit `user-config.nix` with your information:

```nix
{
  username = "your-macos-username";  # Must match your macOS login
  fullName = "Your Full Name";
  email = "your.email@example.com";
  githubUsername = "your-github-username";
  hostname = "your-hostname";  # e.g., macbook-pro
}
```

4. **Run Installation**

This script automates the initial setup: installs Xcode tools (if needed), Homebrew, Nix, clones this repository if needed, sets up initial symlinks (including for a temporary shell environment from `nix/`), and performs the first system build using `nix-darwin`.

```bash
./pre-nix-installation.sh
```

After the script completes and the first build is successful, **open a new terminal window** for the fully configured environment managed by Home Manager to take effect.

## SSH Setup & Validation

The installation script includes intelligent SSH key management:

- **Detects existing SSH keys** and lets you choose which to use
- **Creates GitHub-specific key** at `~/.ssh/github` (via symlink or new key)
- **Automatically uploads** your public key to GitHub
- **Configures SSH properly** for seamless GitHub authentication

**Validate your SSH setup anytime:**

```bash
./validate-ssh.sh
```

This will check:
- SSH key existence and type
- SSH agent configuration
- GitHub connection status
- Home-manager SSH configuration
- Provide troubleshooting guidance

## GPG Setup for GitHub (Optional but Recommended)

For enhanced security and verified commits on GitHub, you can automatically set up GPG signing:

```bash
./setup-gpg-github.sh
```

This script will:

- ✅ Check if a GPG key already exists for your email
- ✅ Generate a new GPG key if needed (using secure defaults)
- ✅ Authenticate with GitHub (if not already done)
- ✅ Upload your public key to GitHub automatically
- ✅ Update your `user-config.nix` with the key ID
- ✅ Rebuild your configuration
- ✅ Test GPG signing functionality

**Prerequisites:**

- `user-config.nix` must be configured with your email
- GitHub CLI authentication (script will prompt if needed)

**After setup:**

- All your commits will be automatically signed
- GitHub will show "Verified" badges on your commits
- Your GPG key ID will be saved in `user-config.nix`

**Manual GitHub Authentication (if needed):**

```bash
gh auth login
```

**Example Output:**

```
=== Automated GPG Setup for GitHub ===

[INFO] Checking prerequisites...
[SUCCESS] Prerequisites check passed
[INFO] Extracting user information from user-config.nix...
[SUCCESS] User info extracted: John Doe <john@example.com>
[INFO] Checking for existing GPG keys...
[WARNING] No existing GPG key found for john@example.com
[INFO] Generating new GPG key for john@example.com...
[SUCCESS] GPG key generated successfully: ABC123DEF456789
[INFO] Checking GitHub authentication...
[SUCCESS] GitHub authentication confirmed
[INFO] Checking if GPG key already exists on GitHub...
[WARNING] GPG key not found on GitHub
[INFO] Uploading GPG key to GitHub...
[SUCCESS] GPG key uploaded to GitHub successfully
[INFO] Updating user-config.nix with GPG key ID...
[SUCCESS] Updated user-config.nix with GPG key ID: ABC123DEF456789
[INFO] Rebuilding Darwin configuration...
[SUCCESS] Darwin configuration rebuilt successfully
[INFO] Testing GPG signing...
[SUCCESS] GPG signing test passed
[SUCCESS] Git signing is enabled

[SUCCESS] GPG setup completed successfully!

Next steps:
1. Make a test commit: git commit -m 'Test GPG signing'
2. Push to GitHub: git push origin main
3. Check GitHub for the 'Verified' badge
4. Your GPG key ID is: ABC123DEF456789
```

## Applying Changes

After the initial setup, to apply any changes you make to the configuration files in this repository, run the following command from the `~/Documents/dotfile` directory:

```bash
sudo darwin-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
# Or use the 'rebuild' alias (which includes sudo automatically)
rebuild
```

**Note:** The `sudo` is required due to recent nix-darwin updates that require system activation to run as root for security reasons.

## Directory Structure

```bash
.
├── darwin/                      # macOS system configuration
│   ├── configuration.nix        # Core system settings
│   ├── homebrew.nix             # Homebrew package management
│   ├── nix-settings.nix         # Nix daemon configuration
│   ├── macos-defaults.nix       # macOS system defaults
│   └── misc-system.nix          # Miscellaneous system settings
├── flake.lock                   # Lock file for dependencies
├── flake.nix                    # System definition
├── home-manager/                # User environment
│   ├── aliases.nix              # Shell aliases (optimized with helper functions)
│   ├── default.nix              # Main user configuration
│   ├── neovim.nix               # Neovim configuration
│   └── modules/                 # Configuration modules
│       ├── alacritty/           # Terminal emulator
│       │   ├── config.toml      # Alacritty configuration
│       │   └── default.nix      # Module definition
│       ├── aws-sso.nix          # AWS SSO with lazy loading
│       ├── aws.nix              # AWS CLI configuration
│       ├── git.nix              # Git configuration
│       ├── github.nix           # GitHub CLI setup
│       ├── karabiner/           # Keyboard customization
│       │   └── default.nix      # Module definition
│       ├── lazygit.nix          # Git TUI configuration
│       ├── rectangle.nix        # Window management
│       ├── starship.nix         # Shell prompt (optimized)
│       ├── tmux.nix             # Terminal multiplexer
│       └── zsh.nix              # Shell configuration
├── nix/                         # Nix configuration
│   ├── dynamic-config.zsh       # Dynamic shell config
│   ├── nix.conf                 # Nix settings
│   └── zshrc                    # ZSH configuration
├── docs/                        # Documentation
├── pre-nix-installation.sh      # Installation script
├── uninstall.sh                 # Uninstallation script
├── user-config.nix              # User settings (Created from template)
└── user-config.template.nix     # Template for user settings
```

**Note on `nix/` Directory:** The files `nix/zshrc` and `nix/dynamic-config.zsh` are symlinked directly into `~/` by the `pre-nix-installation.sh` script. They provide a minimal, temporary shell environment immediately after the script finishes, before you open a new terminal. The full, robust shell environment is declaratively configured by Home Manager (`home-manager/modules/zsh.nix`) and takes effect in new terminal sessions after the first build.

## Quick Reference

**⚡ Performance Optimized**: Fast shell startup with lazy-loaded functions and streamlined configurations.

### System Commands

```bash
rebuild   # Alias for sudo darwin-rebuild switch --flake .#$(hostname)
update    # Update flake inputs and rebuild
cleanup   # Clean old Nix generations
```

### Common Tools

```bash
# Git
gs        # Status
gp        # Push
gl        # Pull
lg        # LazyGit TUI

# GitHub
ghprc     # Checkout PR
ghprl     # List PRs

# Cloud (lazy-loaded for fast startup)
awsp      # Switch AWS profile
awsf      # Ultimate AWS workflow
```

## Documentation

Comprehensive documentation is organized into the following sections:

### Core Guides

- [Installation Guide](docs/core/installation.md) - Complete setup instructions
- [Configuration Guide](docs/core/configuration.md) - System configuration
- [Troubleshooting Guide](docs/core/troubleshooting.md) - Common issues and solutions

### Tool Configuration

- [Git & GitHub](docs/git.md)
- [Cloud Tools](docs/cloud.md)
- [Terminal Tools](docs/terminal.md)

### Customization

- [Package Management](docs/customization/packages.md) - Adding and managing packages
- [Module System](docs/customization/modules.md) - Working with modules
- [Theme Configuration](docs/customization/themes.md) - Visual customization

Each guide contains detailed examples and best practices for its respective area.

## Uninstallation

```bash
./uninstall.sh
```

## Acknowledgments

This configuration was developed with the assistance of [Cursor](https://cursor.sh), an AI-powered code editor that helped:

- Generate and structure configuration files
- Debug Nix expressions
- Create comprehensive documentation
- Maintain consistent code style

## Important Notes

-*   **Neovim:** The Neovim configuration (`home-manager/neovim.nix`) uses an activation script to bootstrap a [LazyVim](https://www.lazyvim.org/) starter configuration into `~/.config/nvim` if that directory doesn't exist. Subsequent Neovim configuration changes should be made manually within `~/.config/nvim`. For a fully declarative setup, `programs.neovim` would need significant refactoring.
